The information about release 4.0.1 (#1767)
pace-neutrons/Horace: documentation/release_notes/v4.0.md

## Release Notes v4.0

> This is version 4 of Horace, which contains major changes to the Horace code produced within 3-years of PACE project development. It is major upgrade from the Horace version 3.6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Irrelevant to software information or already obvious from title.

> Draft version of these changes were used in ISIS in cycles: 2024/1&2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Draft versions of these changes were used at ISIS in cycles: 2024/1&2.
```

The code is tested against Matlab versions 2019b-2023b.

## Major changes.

> As part of major new features we would emphasise:
> 
>   - Fully changed internal structure of sqw objects. In particular:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a major part of the new features we would like to emphasise the fully restructured sqw objects. In particular they provide the following benefits:
```

> 
>   - allows usage of different projections (images in different coordinate system)
> 
>   - provides the same way of operating with sqw objects regardless of the way they are stored internally (the whole sqw object can stay in memory or , if the pixel data can not fit memory, the object can be stored on files).
> 
>   - New types of cuts using spherical and cylindrical projections
> 
>   - New symmetry operations and ways of symmetrizing sqw objects.
> 
>   - Extended parallel operations, new parallel algorithms for sqw_eval and Tobyfit.
> 
>   - It writes sqw objects in a new more efficient and flexible binary format though still can read of previous versions of sqw files. sqw files produced by Horace-4 can not be read by previous versions of Horace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Allows use of different projections: images (`dnd`) in different coordinate systems.
  - Now provides cuts using spherical and cylindrical projections with more coming.

- On-file sqws for cases where they do not fit in memory, with a unified interface (no need to learn anything new, for big jobs!).

- New symmetry operations and ways of symmetrizing sqw objects.
  - Multiple reductions in a single `symmetrize_sqw` call, rotationally symmetric reduction.
  - Symmetrised cuts which can be more efficient and more general.

- Extended parallel capabilities
  - New parallel algorithms for `sqw_eval` and fitting.

- New more efficient and flexible binary format.
  - **NOTE:** Horace can read previous versions of sqw files, however, sqw files produced by Horace v4+ can not be read by previous versions of Horace.
```

> ## Major internal changes, wich may break compatibility with old Horace scripts

Reviewer: **Note:** Edit below should be consisdered instead
```suggestion
## Major internal changes, which may break compatibility with old Horace scripts
```

> ## Major internal changes, wich may break compatibility with old Horace scripts
>  -- Renamed `fake_sqw` to `dummy_sqw`
>  
>  -- `DnD` objects are fully refactored and constructed from `axes_block` class (property `axes`), `aProjection` class (property   `proj`) and three datasets, namely `s,e` and `npix` containing signal, error and number of pixels contributed into a bin, as before. `axes_block` defines binning of these datasets and their physical meaning, while projection defines the transformation from pixels coordinate system to the coordinate system, defined by `axes_block`. Old interface (`iax,pax,iint,p etc.`) left for compatibility with existing algorithms and set as read-only interface.
>  
>  -- `multifit` and `tobyfit` are now able to be run in parallel through the `hpc_config` `parallel_multifit` setting.
>  
>  -- `data_sqw_dnd` class (property `data` of `sqw` object) have been removed from `sqw` object and replaced by appropriate dimension `dnd` object. Pixels data (`PixelData` class), which were the property of `data_sqw_dnd` class are now independent property of `sqw` object (property `pix`). Old and refactored `data_sqw_dnd` class left for compatibility with old `sqw` files, allowing the loading of old data from `.mat` files.
>  
>  -- Added benchmarking features under the `_benchmarking` folder which will run on CI or can be run by users using either the `benchmark_horace` script or by running individual benchmark functions. Documentation included in SMG 20
>  
>  -- Spawning parallel jobs with Herbert/C++ MPI no longer spawns inappropriate MATLAB threads oversubscribing the machine and causing slowdown.
>  
>  -- Slurm cluster handling has been rewritten to deal appropriately with multiple node requests and automatically handle threading.
>  
>  -- `threads` and `parallel_workers` have migrated from `hpc_config` to `parallel_config`
>  
>  -- `herbert_config` has been deprecated and features of `herbert_config` have migrated to `hor_config`
>  
>  -- Number of less substantial additions and improvement in algorithms and design (more than 1000 competed tickets) refactoring and improving existing algorithms, providing various new features and making code much more modular to allow better maintenance and future Horace development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Breaking Changes
- Renamed `fake_sqw` to `dummy_sqw`
 
- Fully refactored `SQw` objects:
  - `data_sqw_dnd` class (property `data` of `sqw` object) has been removed from `sqw` object and replaced by appropriately dimensioned `dnd` object. 
  - Pixel data (`PixelData` class), which were a property of the `data_sqw_dnd` class are now an independent property of `sqw` object (`pix` property). 
  - Old and refactored `data_sqw_dnd` class left for compatibility with old `sqw` files, allowing the loading of old data from `.mat` files.
 
 - Fully refactored`DnD` objects now made up of:
  - `axes_block` class (`axes` property),  defining binning of these datasets and their physical meaning,
  - `aProjection` class (`proj` property), defining the transformation from pixels coordinate system to the coordinate system, defined by `axes_block`.
  - and three datasets, namely `s,e` and `npix` containing signal, error and number of pixels contributed into a bin, as before. 
  - **NOTE:** Old interface (`iax`, `pax`, `iint`, `p`, etc.) left for compatibility with existing algorithms through read-only interface.
 
- `multifit` and `tobyfit` can be run in parallel through the `hpc_config` `parallel_multifit` setting.
  
- Added benchmarking in the `_benchmarking` folder which will run on CI or can be run by users using either the `benchmark_horace` script or by running individual benchmark functions. Documentation included in SMG 20.

- Spawning parallel jobs with Herbert/C++ MPI no longer spawns inappropriate MATLAB threads oversubscribing the machine and causing slowdown.
 
- Slurm cluster interface has been rewritten to deal appropriately with multiple node requests and automatically handle threading.
 
- `threads` and `parallel_workers` have migrated from `hpc_config` to `parallel_config`
 
- `herbert_config` has been deprecated and features of `herbert_config` have migrated to `hor_config`
 
- More than 1,000 additional tasks making substantial additions and improvements to algorithms and design: refactoring and improving existing algorithms, providing new features and making code more modular to facilitate maintenance and future Horace development.
```

## Breaking Changes
- Renamed `fake_sqw` to `dummy_sqw`
 
- Fully refactored `SQW` objects:
  - `data_sqw_dnd` class (property `data` of `sqw` object) has been removed from `sqw` object and replaced by appropriately dimensioned `dnd` object. 
  - Pixel data (`PixelData` class), which were a property of the `data_sqw_dnd` class are now an independent property of `sqw` object (`pix` property). 
  - Old and refactored `data_sqw_dnd` class left for compatibility with old `sqw` files, allowing the loading of old data from `.mat` files.
 

> - Fully refactored`DnD` objects now made up of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fully refactored `DnD` objects now made up of:
```

 
- `herbert_config` has been deprecated and features of `herbert_config` have migrated to `hor_config`
 

> - `fit_sqw` function have been removed in favour of direct usage of `multifit_sqw` class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `fit_sqw` functions have been removed in favour of direct use of `multifit` family classes.
```
